# LSE_Spotify_Project

## Motivation
In this analysis, we sought to display and analyze the trends in musical attributes across different years and countries, described as “markets” going forward. Music plays a central role in many people’s lives through its ability to entertain and also its ability to impact mood and stress levels (Gray, 2022). Increased technology and the rise of modern music platforms allows individuals to be constantly connected to artists and their music. With this shift, music has become an even more central part of people’s lives and can be thought of as a reflection of the individual’s identity, mood, and well-being at any certain point in time. Using a quantified view of music, this analysis seeks to identify particular key attributes of popular music across years and countries and any potential shifts that may have occurred.

Given that an individual’s musical listening habits can be interpreted as a reflection of their well-being, this analysis will compare trends in popular music to two additional views of the well-being of certain countries over certain years - GDP per country and their Happiness Index. Using a layered approach of musical and well-being data will provide additional insight into the way in which music can exist as a reflection of culture at a certain time and place. Finally, this analysis seeks to cluster songs based on their shared quantitative attributes and finally classifies songs as "Popular" vs "Not Popular" using these same attributes.

## Research Questions
1. How do the key attributes of music interact with one another and do there exist any relations between them?

2. How have the key attributes of popular music shifted over time and how does this relate to the well-being of certain countries at those points in time?

3. Can music be grouped based on shared quantitative attributes, to provide insight into shared attributes and how does this relate to the genre attribute? Based on these attributes, can a song be predicted to be Popular or Not Popular?

## Conclusion
This analysis sought to analyse Spotify musical attributes, in relation to each other and other country-level factors of well-being. Additionally, this analysis sought to dive further into how these attributes lead to various groupings of songs and whether attributes can be used to predict the popularity of a song.

In our analysis, we first discovered that there do exist relations between various musical attributes and that the Spotify-based rank of popularity varies across years and markets. Additionally, comparing musical attributes against other markers of the well-being of a country (happiness and GDP) can produce interesting insights. While music certainly does not provide a full contextual picture for these markers, given that there are many aspects that influence them, music can be a way in which some of the effects of these markers manifest themselves. For example, happier countries do sometimes seem to listen to more positive music.

Finally, clustering the quantitative dataset of music provides insight into the ways in which music is differentiated, especially alongside the pop genre. Taking this idea of differentiation one step further, it was concluded that predicting a binary Spotify popularity class based of attributes is possible and outperforms that of random classifiers. This suggests that popular music does in fact share attributes that contributes to its popularity.

This analysis did suffer from several limitations, including the high reliance on the Spotify definitions of the attributes used. Given that the analysis leveraged an API, our group was entirely dependent on the outputs of this API and their sourcing. For example, an attribute such as popularity was entirely defined by Spotify using logic that we do not have complete insight into. Additionally, given API limitations, this analysis was limited to several years and markets. More markets would have provided a more representative data set to be used but would have exceeded API rate limits.

In terms of next steps, studies on similar topics could look further into the correlations between musical attributes themselves and other markers to provide research into whether these relations can be seen as causal relationships. Moreover, additional research could seek to explore other markers of well-being that music could provide a reflection of. While this study focused on happiness (Happiness Index) and productivity (GDP per Capita) topics using different markers or different topics altogether could be explored using similar methodology. Additionally, next steps could include the use of the classification models created during this study and test their performance on songs outside of the scope of our initial dataset. Given that the entire, and thus also training, data set was formed of only four markets, performance of the classifiers outside of these markets should be tested further and used with caution.
